README.md, before:

# vcf2tsv: genomic VCF to tab-separated values (TSV)

A small Python program that converts genomic variant data encoded in [VCF format](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.2.pdf) into a tab-separated values (TSV) file.

The script utilizes the [cyvcf2](https://github.com/brentp/cyvcf2) library to parse the VCF file. By default, the program prints the fixed VCF columns, all `INFO` tag values (as defined in the VCF header, `INFO` tags not present in a given record is appended with a `'.'`), and all genotype data (FORMAT columns) for heterozygotes and homozygotes. If genotype data is present, it prints one line per sample, and a column denoted `VCF_SAMPLE_ID` indicates data for a given sample. Importantly, the program has optional arguments to

* skip sample genotype data (i.e. `FORMAT` colums) - print only variant information
* keep rejected genotypes (i.e. `FILTER` != ``'PASS'`` / `GT` == `'./.'`)
* skip `INFO` data.
* compress output TSV
* print data types of VCF columns as a header line

<br>

__IMPORTANT__: If you run vcf2tsv with a large multi-sample VCF file, the file size of the output TSV will quickly grow fairly large, since there is, by default, one line per sample genotype in the output. Turn on `--skip_genotype_data` if you are primarily interested in the variant INFO elements, file size of output TSV will also be considerably smaller.

## Installation

The software can be installed with the [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) package manager, using the following command:

- `conda install -c sigven vcf2tsv`

## Usage


	vcf2tsv --input_vcf <INPUT_VCF> --out_tsv <OUTPUT_TSV>
		   -h [options]

	vcf2tsv:  Convert a VCF (Variant Call Format) file with genomic variants to a file with
			tab-separated values (TSV). One entry (TSV line) per sample genotype.

	Required arguments:
		--input_vcf INPUT_VCF	Bgzipped input VCF file with input variants (SNVs/InDels)
		--out_tsv OUT_TSV     	Output TSV file with one line per non-rejected sample genotype
							(variant, genotype and annotation data as tab-separated values)

	Optional arguments:
		--skip_info_data      	Skip output of data in INFO column
		--skip_genotype_data  	Skip output of genotype_data (FORMAT columns)
		--keep_rejected_calls	Output data also for rejected (non-PASS) calls
		--print_data_type_header	Output a header line with data types of VCF annotations
		--compress            	Compress output TSV file with gzip
		--version             	Show program's version number and exit

Commit message:

Rename tool to vcf2tsvpy

README.md, after:

# vcf2tsvpy: genomic VCF to tab-separated values (TSV)

A small Python program that converts genomic variant data encoded in [VCF format](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.2.pdf) into a tab-separated values (TSV) file.

The program utilizes the [cyvcf2](https://github.com/brentp/cyvcf2) library to parse the VCF file. By default, the program prints the fixed VCF columns, all `INFO` tag values (as defined in the VCF header, `INFO` tags not present in a given record is appended with a `'.'`), and all genotype data (FORMAT columns) for heterozygotes and homozygotes. If genotype data is present, it prints one line per sample, and a column denoted `VCF_SAMPLE_ID` indicates data for a given sample. Importantly, the program has optional arguments to

* skip sample genotype data (i.e. `FORMAT` colums) - print only variant information
* keep rejected genotypes (i.e. `FILTER` != ``'PASS'`` / `GT` == `'./.'`)
* skip `INFO` data.
* compress output TSV
* print data types of VCF columns as a header line

<br>

__IMPORTANT__: If you run _vcf2tsvpy_ with a large multi-sample VCF file, the file size of the output TSV will quickly grow fairly large, since there is, by default, one line per sample genotype in the output. Turn on `--skip_genotype_data` if you are primarily interested in the variant INFO elements, file size of output TSV will also be considerably smaller.

## Installation

The software can be installed with the [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) package manager, using the following command:

- `conda install -c sigven vcf2tsvpy`

## Usage


	vcf2tsvpy --input_vcf <INPUT_VCF> --out_tsv <OUTPUT_TSV>
		   -h [options]

	vcf2tsvpy:  Convert a VCF (Variant Call Format) file with genomic variants to a file with
			tab-separated values (TSV). One entry (TSV line) per sample genotype.

	Required arguments:
		--input_vcf INPUT_VCF	Bgzipped input VCF file with input variants (SNVs/InDels)
		--out_tsv OUT_TSV     	Output TSV file with one line per non-rejected sample genotype
							(variant, genotype and annotation data as tab-separated values)

	Optional arguments:
		--skip_info_data      	Skip output of data in INFO column
		--skip_genotype_data  	Skip output of genotype_data (FORMAT columns)
		--keep_rejected_calls	Output data also for rejected (non-PASS) calls
		--print_data_type_header	Output a header line with data types of VCF annotations
		--compress            	Compress output TSV file with gzip
		--version             	Show program's version number and exit
